What is Hacking?
Hacking is the unauthorised access, use, disruption, modification, or destruction
of computer systems, networks, or devices, often with the goal of stealing or manipulating
data or disrupting services.

List the stages of Hacking.
Reconnaissance
Scanning
Gaining Access
Maintaining Access
Cover Tracks

What do you mean by vulnerability assessment?
Vulnerability assessment is a process of identifying risks and vulnerabilities in computer
systems, networks, hardware, applications, and other parts of the ecosystem. It helps in
protecting systems and data from unauthorized access and breaches.

What is Penetration Testing?
Penetration testing (also known as "pen testing") is a simulated cyber attack on a computer
system, network, or web application to test its defenses and identify vulnerabilities that an
attacker could exploit. The goal of a pen test is to determine if an attacker could gain
unauthorized access to the system or steal sensitive data.

What is meant by reconnaissance?
Reconnaissance is the initial stage of an attack, where the attacker gathers information about
the target. This can include research on the target's employees, network infrastructure, and
security measures. The goal of reconnaissance is to gather as much information as possible
about the target, which can be used to plan and execute a successful attack.

What are the types of reconnaissance?
Passive reconnaissance: Passive reconnaissance is the process of gathering
information about a target without interacting with it directly.
Active reconnaissance: Active reconnaissance is the process of actively interacting
with a target to gather information. 

What is Port Scanning?
Port scanning is the process of connecting to TCP and UDP ports to determine what
services and applications are running on the target device.

List the tools used for Port Scanning.
NMAP
Netcat
TCP Port Scanner
MASSCAN

Define vulnerability scanning.
Vulnerability scanning is the process of discovering, analyzing, and reporting on security
flaws and vulnerabilities.
Vulnerability scans are conducted via automated vulnerability scanning tools to identify
potential risk exposures and attack vectors across an organization’s networks, hardware,
software, and systems.

List tools for vulnerability scanning.
Burp Suite
NMAP
Metasploit
Wireshark

Describe the Metasploit Framework.
The Metasploit Framework (MSF) is an open-source tool designed to facilitate
penetration testing. It is Written in the Ruby programming language. It makes it easier to develop and code exploits, and it also allows for complex
attacks to be easily implemented.

What is firmware?
Firmware is a software program on the hardware device, which performs functions
like basic input/output tasks and offers necessary instructions for the device to
communicate with other computing devices.

Describe Social Engineering Toolkit(SET).
It is an open-source python-driven framework that is specifically designed to facilitate social
engineering attacks. The tool was designed with the objective of achieving security by
training.It is maintained by an active group of collaborators.


